The 2022 Tour de France is the 109th edition of the Tour de France. It started in Copenhagen, Denmark on 1 July[1] and ended with the final stage at Champs-Élysées, Paris on 24 July.[2]
The twelfth stage featured the race's queen stage as the riders travelled from Briançon to Alpe d'Huez. The riders gradually climbed from the get-go, passing through the intermediate sprint in Le Monêtier-les-Bains after 11.8 kilometres (7.3 mi). Immediately afterwards, the riders made their way back up the Col du Galibier but this time, the riders went up the hors categorie Col du Lautaret side, which is 23 kilometres (14 mi) long with an average of 5.1 percent. After descending the Galibier and the Télégraphe, the riders made their way towards the hors categorieCol de la Croix de Fer, a 29-kilometre (18 mi) climb with an average of 5.2 percent. Despite the average gradient, the climb had two short descents while the last 6.5 kilometres (4.0 mi) averaged 8.3 percent. At the top, there were 54.5 kilometres (33.9 mi) left on the stage. Following a step descent and a flat section, the riders reached the foot of the hors categorie Alpe d'Huez for another summit finish. The climb is 13.8 kilometres (8.6 mi) long with an average of 8.1 percent. The first 11 kilometres (6.8 mi) of the climb averaged almost 9 percent before easing to around 5 percent near the summit. All in all, the stage had a total of 4,630 metres (15,190 ft) of vertical climbing.
As soon as the stage started, Neilson Powless (EF Education–EasyPost) attacked out of the peloton. He was soon joined by five other riders as the peloton allowed the break to gain two minutes. On the climb of Col du Galibier, attacks flew out of the peloton as several riders tried to bridge to the break. Four riders, Giulio Ciccone (Trek–Segafredo), Louis Meintjes (Intermarché–Wanty–Gobert Matériaux), Tom Pidcock (Ineos Grenadiers), and Chris Froome (Israel–Premier Tech), eventually managed to break away from the peloton as Team Jumbo–Visma began to set a steady tempo in the peloton. Meanwhile, up front, Anthony Perez (Cofidis) left his breakaway companions to take the maximum KoM points at the top of the Galibier. On the descent, Powless, Ciccone, and Meintjes bridged up to Perez to form the lead group. Sebastian Schönberger (B&B Hotels–KTM), Kobe Goossens (Intermarché–Wanty–Gobert Matériaux), Nelson Oliveira (Movistar Team), Pidcock, and Froome soon made their way to the front group to establish the break of nine riders. The group extended their lead to seven and a half minutes over the peloton before Team Jumbo–Visma lifted the pace on Col de la Croix de Fer. On the way to the top of the climb, Oliveira, Goossens, Schönberger, and Perez were dropped from the break, with the lead quintet crossing the top of Croix de Fer at almost four and a half minutes before the peloton did so.
On the descent, the peloton eased the pace, allowing the break to extend their advantage to six and a half minutes before they reached the climb of Alpe d'Huez. With around 10.6 kilometres (6.6 mi) left, Pidcock attacked from the break. Initially, Meintjes, as well as Froome a few seconds behind him, set a steady tempo to keep Pidcock at less than ten seconds ahead but Pidcock gradually extended his lead all the way to the top. He soloed to the top to take his first World Tour win and he also became the youngest rider to win on Alpe d'Huez. Meintjes took second, 48 seconds down, while Froome finished third at over two minutes behind. Meanwhile, in the peloton, Team Jumbo–Visma increased the pace on the climb. The GC contenders began to drop from the group until only the maillot jaune, Jonas Vingegaard (Team Jumbo–Visma), his teammate, Sepp Kuss, Tadej Pogačar (UAE Team Emirates), Geraint Thomas (Ineos Grenadiers), and Enric Mas (Movistar Team) remained. Towards the top, Pogačar attacked twice and only Vingegaard was able to follow him both times. Pogačar and Vingegaard eventually slowed near the finish, allowing Thomas, Kuss, and Mas to come back to them. At the finish, Pogačar sprinted for time gaps but there were no gaps between him, Vingegaard, and Thomas.
In the GC, Vingegaard kept the maillot jaune, 2' 22" ahead of Pogačar, who moved up to second, while Thomas rose to third, a further four seconds behind. Romain Bardet (Team DSM) dropped to fourth after losing 19 seconds. Adam Yates (Ineos Grenadiers), Nairo Quintana (Arkéa–Samsic), and David Gaudu (Groupama–FDJ) occupy fifth to seventh after having lost between 38 seconds to 1' 21". Pidcock returned to the top ten with his stage win and time gains on the stage.[3][4]
the 13th stage of the 2022 Tour de France took the Chemin des Aqueducs into Vienne just before crossing the Rhône and beginning the climb of Côte Saint-Romain-en-Gal
The thirteenth stage featured a transition stage that took the riders from Le Bourg-d'Oisans to Saint-Étienne. From the start, the riders gradually descended towards the third-category Côte de Brié. Following the descent and a long flat section, the riders tackled the second-category Col de Parménie. Another descent and a short flat section led to the intermediate sprint in La Côte-Saint-André with 91 kilometres (57 mi) left. Following a gradual descent, the riders climbed up the final categorised climb of the day, the third-category Côte de Saint-Romain-en-Gal, which was crested with 44 kilometres (27 mi) to go. Near the finish, there was an uncategorised climb that peaked with 7.6 kilometres (4.7 mi) remaining. After cresting the top, the riders rode on a plateau section that led to the finish in Saint-Étienne.
There was a furious fight for the break as several riders attempted to go in the move. It took until the climb of Côte de Brié before a trio of riders, Filippo Ganna (Ineos Grenadiers), Stefan Küng (Groupama–FDJ), and Matteo Jorgenson (Movistar Team), built a gap over the peloton. Behind them, a group of 19 riders tried to bridge up to the trio but they were brought back by the Alpecin–Deceuninck-led peloton. Eventually, Hugo Houle (Israel–Premier Tech), Fred Wright (Team Bahrain Victorious), and the Trek–Segafredo duo of Mads Pedersen and Quinn Simmons escaped from the peloton and bridged up to the trio up front. The break of seven built a lead of around two and a half minutes as the sprinters' teams kept them in check. At the intermediate sprint, after the break took maximum points, Wout van Aert (Team Jumbo–Visma) led the peloton across to increase his lead in the points classification. With around 71 kilometres (44 mi) left, there was a crash that involved Caleb Ewan (Lotto–Soudal), hurting his knee in the process, but he continued the race. Ahead of the Côte de Saint-Romain-en-Gal, the gap started to come down to the break.
On the climb, several sprinters began to drop, forcing the sprinters' teams to get off the front of the peloton. As the pace eased, the break's lead increased towards three and a half minutes. With 46 kilometres (29 mi) remaining, Simmons dropped out of the break after finishing his work for Pedersen. Eventually, Team BikeExchange–Jayco took up the chase in the peloton. They quickly decreased the break's advantage to two and a half minutes before the gap stabilised. The lead remained at less than two and a half minutes before Team BikeExchange–Jayco called off the chase. Up front, the break continued to work well together until Pedersen launched an attack with 10.6 kilometres (6.6 mi) to go. Only Wright and Houle were able to follow him, with the gap over Ganna, Küng, and Jorgenson gradually increasing towards the finish. Wright and Houle attempted to attack Pedersen in the final kilometres, but the Dane was able to respond each time. The lead trio came to the finish together, with Pedersen launching his sprint with 250 metres (820 ft) to go. Wright and Houle never came close as Pedersen won his first Grand Tour stage. The chasing trio finished half a minute down while van Aert led the peloton across almost six minutes down. There were no changes in the top ten as Jonas Vingegaard (Team Jumbo–Visma) kept the maillot jaune.[6][7]
The fourteenth stage featured another hilly stage that took the riders from Saint-Étienne to Mende. The first 66.1 kilometres (41.1 mi) had an undulating terrain, with the riders tackling the third-category climbs of Côte de Saint-Just-Malmont and Côte de Châtaignier in the first 40 kilometres (25 mi) as well as the intermediate sprint in Yssingeaux after 50.7 kilometres (31.5 mi) of racing. Following a short flat section, the riders went up an uncategorised climb before tackling the third-category Côte de Grandrieu. Afterwards, the riders rode on a plateau section before going up the third-category Côte de la Fage, which was crested with 30.4 kilometres (18.9 mi) left. Following a long descent, the riders tackled the final categorised climb, the second-category Côte de la Croix Neuve Montée Jalabert, which is 3 kilometres (1.9 mi) long with an average of 10.2 percent. After cresting the top, there were 1.5 kilometres (0.93 mi) left until the finish at the Mende Airfield.
With the high likelihood of a breakaway challenging for the stage win, several riders attempted to make it into the break. With around 180 kilometres (110 mi) still to go, on the Côte de Saint-Just-Malmont, Tadej Pogačar (UAE Team Emirates) attacked twice but the maillot jaune, Jonas Vingegaard (Team Jumbo–Visma), was able to respond both times. The breakaway fight continued on until the riders reached the Côte de Châtaignier with around 153 kilometres (95 mi) left when a group of 23 riders broke away from the peloton. Team Jumbo–Visma proceeded to block the road and allowed the break to extend their advantage to more than 14 minutes, ensuring that the break will fight for the stage win. The break continued to work well together until Michael Matthews (Team BikeExchange–Jayco) attacked with 53.8 kilometres (33.4 mi) remaining. He built a gap over his breakaway companions, who began to attack each other a